family liked to joke, 'The Oscars are our Super Bowl.' Perhaps going to an extremely nerdy high school, where it was cool to be smart and everyone had at least 1 geeky special interest, played a role. Or maybe I just have a natural inclination towards fantasy and sci-fi as a lover of narrative fiction and practiced maladaptive daydreamer.

Whatever the case, I know that everything led to me sitting my butt in a movie theater seat on opening weekend to watch Superman (2025).

Needless to say, I had a fantastic time. It’s not that the film was perfect, or that every scene was cinematic masterpiece, but it was full of heart. More importantly, I think the film tapped into a lot of the cultural conversations I’ve been recently pondering.

My mind is so full of analysis, it’s almost hard to get it down on the page in an organized fashion. But I’ll start with this preface re: the unique cultural positioning of story adaptations.

As much as everyone is tired of crappy franchise remakes, there is something to be said for the unique storytelling ability of a good adaptation. When an audience enters an already familiar world, full of prior knowledge and expectations of how the characters are going to act, it places implicit emphasis on the ways in which an adaptation deviates from a story’s previous iterations. Many times, the updates and changes are orchestrated by the adaptation’s auteurs in order to imbue the new work with contemporary cultural relevancy. In other words, every artist setting out to remake something has to deal with the questions: Why do I think the story needs to be told again now? How do I make today’s audiences care about this story?

I was reminded strongly of Jeffrey Jerome Cohen’s Monster Theory, an academic work which argues that monsters can be used as a lens to examine the cultural tensions and fears of the society that created them. Or, as the book’s official description puts it, “We live in a time of monsters. Monsters provide a key to understanding the culture that spawned them.”

The scariest monsters are ones that tap into our deep-seated cultural fears—fear of science gone too far (Jurassic Park’s dinosaurs, Frankenstein’s monster, iRobot), fear of sexual corruption (sexy vampires, alluring siren mermaids), fear of nature (Sasquatch, the kraken). I’m sure the experts could list out many more examples—and often, monsters draw from a combination of fears and anxieties.

The academic conversations surrounding both adaptations and monster theory feel very intertwined in my mind. We keep making new adaptations of old monster movies—Jurassic World Rebirth (2025) and Nosferatu (2024) are recent examples. These new iterations beg questions such as: Which cultural fears from the 19th century do we still have today? And: Besides the updated camera quality, what about the new versions of these stories truly make it ‘scarier’?

But as much as I love monsters in the context of literary/cinematic analysis, I am a creature of the light. I get scared easily. I can’t actually make myself watch all of these movies for the sake of academic interest—I’d never be able to sleep again.

So instead, I find myself in the world of superheroes (or otherwise magical heroic characters). Magical/super heroes are the narrative inverse of monsters, and many of them are also subject to the powers of adaptation. We’ve been remaking superhero stories for the last century. In fact, the first time Superman appeared in a comic book was in 1938. That was before the start of World War 2. A lot has happened to our world since then, and a lot of versions of Superman (in comic, TV, and film form) have popped up since then. And yet, a brand new Superman movie can still pack out a theater on opening weekend.

This goes beyond big marketing budgets and financial studio support. There is something about the lore of superheroes that draws audiences in. So my questions this week are: What cultural fears does Superman protect us from? What idealistic qualities does Superman embody? How does the Superman film help audiences imagine the pathway towards creating a better, less scary world?

Let’s dive in. (And please note, there will be some movie spoilers).

1. It's cool to be kind.
Clark – “I’m punk rock.”

Lois – [laughing] “You are not punk rock.”

Clark – “I like the Strangle Fellows, the P.O.D.s, and the Mighty Crabjoys.”

Lois – “Those are pop radio bands, they’re not punk rock. The Mighty Crabjoys suck.”

Clark – “Ah, well, a lot of people love ‘em.”

Lois – “My point is I question everything and everyone. You trust everyone and think everyone you ever met is, like… beautiful.”

Clark – “Maybe that’s the real punk rock.”

What stood out to me the most about this adaptation was Superman’s pure heart. He wants to save everyone—the child, the hot dog seller, the alien, the annoying dog. What his indiscriminatory kindness models is a way of treating everyone with the utmost human dignity. Superman is not only saving people who he likes, or who he agrees with politically, or even who likes him—he is just simply saving them because they are precious living beings. In a world where dignity is often stripped away from groups that are perceived as ‘threatening’, Superman’s heart of gold is a powerful countercultural example of goodheartedness.

Perhaps we are afraid of our society’s increasingly divisive tendencies. Perhaps we are afraid of the way that being labeled as ‘other’ can lead to a lack of perceived humanity. Perhaps we crave a hero who unites us and calls us all worthy.

[Evangelical plug here: This is how Jesus sees everybody. As worthy, dignified, beautiful beings worthy of love and salvation.)

2. Journalism helps to save the world.
We got a feisty Lois Lane in this version of Superman. She’s already dating Superman (hot), but that doesn’t stop her from grilling him on the morally grey areas of his super work. She’s sharp, inquisitive, and doesn’t take vague responses as an answer. It is her intrepid investigative work that leads to the discovery of Lex Luthor’s shady business deals. Publishing the story at The Daily Planet, which happens right at the climactic end of the film, helps to actually stop the bad guy. Superman may have done the physical work to fix the moment of crisis, but the reporters help remove Lex Luthor from public power for good.

Not only is this storyline a fun homage to Lois Lane’s iconic career-driven personality, but it suggests that critical thinking and journalistic integrity are essential in the world’s combat against evil. There is a very real current cultural fear surrounding war-profiteering billionaires, money-making deals that get made in the shadows, and the manipulation of public image so that We the People are none the wiser. Journalism (true journalism) is a great tool to fight against all that craziness. I actually have a journalist in my life who I thought of in this moment (shoutout, Kate). I hope you can channel your inner Lois Lane as you kickstart your career!

3. Heritage, Adoption, & Identity
Superman has a big internal crisis when he learns that his late parents, who he thought sent him to Earth to be a super savior for humans, actually intended for him to be a dictatorial alien overlord. The ‘mission’ which he had based his life around was a total misunderstanding—a communication blip gone awry. He goes home to Kansas to lick his wounds (literally from battle, and spiritually from this shocking revelation). His adoptive parents are exceedingly average midwestern farmers; the Kents live a simple, American, and stable life. In a touching chat on the porch, Clark Kent (the cape’s off while he’s home) and his dad talk through this confusing information regarding his alien parents’ evil intentions.

Papa Kent reminds Clark that he has the agency to live his life beyond the initial desires of his birth parents, and affirms that Clark’s pureness of heart and heroic kindness are all qualities he’s extremely proud of. In the end, this conversation is enough for Clark to make peace with his birth story and go back to being Superman as per usual.

Externally, nothing changed. But internally, Superman had to reconcile his past with his ambitions for the future. He had to make peace with his birth story and intentionally choose what kind of identity he wanted to embrace for himself going forward.

While some people may relate to Clark’s story with a literal experience of adoption, I think this narrative is far more profound when viewed through a more metaphorical lens. In a way, we all have baggage that comes with our heritage. It might be morally questionable ancestors, or unhealthy family habits, or some other defining struggle. But we also all have figures in our life that we can look up to for guidance and moral instruction. This could be a Heavenly Father figure (hi, God), or the people who raised you, or some other combination of trusted advisors and role models. When it comes down to it, all parts of your story contribute to the person you become, and Superman is an example of how to combine it in the most positive way. He wouldn’t have any of his powers without his birth parents—even if they were morally questionable, their existence was necessary for him to become who he is. But his Kansas parents were equally essential, as they taught him the practicalities of kindness and took care of him in childhood.

I wonder if there is a cultural fear surrounding the dark parts of ourselves. Do we think some histories are too dark for redemption? Do we think the baggage of our past will drag us too far down?

They say that God is the best Author, as he is writing the wonderfully complex and beautiful story of the world. Today, I’m reminded to put the pen in his hands and ask him to write my story in a way that makes the most of all parts of my past—the good, the bad, the ugly, and the super.

The above three reflections begin to scratch the surface on some of the cultural relevance and insight I found in the Superman film. It feels like there’s always more to say, but I’ll conclude with a final musing:

Sometimes, fiction is the best way to tell the truth. When the real world feels too dark, too overwhelming, too boring, or too hopeless, stories provide a way for us to meaningfully engage with complex ideas with a super-infused underpinning of hope. Here’s to what I hope is a lifetime of (high-quality) monstruous, heroic, magical remakes—and the hope they provide for our world.